**The Point of Longest Duration**
  
  

On a very cold afternoon in January, I found myself in Edinburgh. Lucy Ellmann had agreed to meet me in a pub where we spent two hours discussing a number of things which are
close to our hearts.  

* * *  

RN: In a number of your books, you go back in time. Sometimes you go very far back, like with the crazy satire of a romantic and patriarchal origin myth in **Doctors and Nurses** (2006) which is told through the grinding of a rock and a gulch. In **Ducks, Newburyport** (2019) you go right through these various geological and historical periods tracing a line past the beginnings of settler-colonialism and the Native American cultures remaining in the landscape in the form of a Serpent Mound, and all the way back to an animal consciousness, which is pre-human, before humans roamed and ruled the planet. Sometimes I feel like these lines are broken (like with Native American culture) or they are continuous (like the patriarchy and the violence in colonialism) and sometimes they are seemingly hidden (like with the animal instincts that we all have, but don’t often recognise or are distant from them). I wondered whether your starting point for the book was this feeling of history and all these layers or did you start from the craziness of the present moment and tried to trace it back?  

LE: I think I was more tracing it back. Though I think you’re right that in using an animal, you’ve got the prehistoric stuff going on anyway, because animals are prehistoric, so the animal had to be there from the start too. But I did think more about the now and how unbearable the present is and I guess I tried to trace it through. I don’t know that much history, I just darted around and I made her a history teacher because she likes to think about history and I wanted to think about it, it’s not that I know much about it. Since the previous novel (**Mimi** (2013)), I have been thinking a lot about prehistory and matriarchy and how we have to get back to that, so that’s a big influence.

RN: **Ducks** reminded me of Thomas Bernhard’s **Extinction** (1986) and Herman Broch’s **The Death of Virgil** (1945) - these huge, expansive novels where a person’s inner life expands out onto the whole of society or the whole world, which are primarily novels of conscience. With your novel I feel that the woman at the centre seems to try to take on the role of the conscience of the U.S.A., for instance through her facing the horrors of the Gnadenhutten Massacre (1782). There is also the passage where a chicken farm is hit by a tornado. The chickens were put in this prison structure and then left to cannibalise each other and die in these horrible conditions. There are also so many references to high school shootings and the effect they have on the consciousness of the schoolchildren and the parents...

LE: In **Extinction** doesn’t he eventually say: Austria should just be given to the Nazis, and they could have it, so that everyone else could just be free of their nonsense? So he was saying they don’t have a conscience – he was their conscience and they didn’t get along with him at all. Well I think America should probably be given to the Nazis now. It’s big enough to hold them, because we have a lot more in the world than we used to, and they should be walled in there… no, the walls are not a good idea, because it’s very hard on the natural world, but they can be told to stay there and hate everybody and not let anyone in, and that’s fine... I don’t see why anyone wants to go there anymore anyway. But conscience… where is it, in Republicans, I don’t understand how they live with themselves at all. I don’t understand the morality of their thinking. So, how do you get through life without any morality? How do they justify this stuff to themselves? They have really given us quite a conundrum to deal with. I think everyone is battling with the insanity of it all. There used to be Republicans you could talk to, more or less. I’d try not to, but if you had to, they were approachable… somewhat. And now they all blithely lock children up, invade sovereign countries whenever they feel like it. America has it in their constitution that they don’t do that - they’re not supposed to make war pre-emptively… and now they do, all the time. Well that’s just ownership. Rich people have no conscience, you get too rich to care… or too powerful. I’ve never really analysed this, that power has a conscience – maybe not. People easily drift into malevolent behaviour, that’s for sure. I think we all are malevolent, but the powerful get away with it. They get their way and no one stops them. Whereas, if I tried to bomb Iran, I think someone would try to stop me pretty quickly, which would be good! And then the people with conscience, like Bernie Sanders, are mocked and ostracised. All he’s saying is: people have a right to health care and employment rights – it’s not that radical, but they can’t bear it.

RN: You are also not easy on the Democrats…

LE: I hate them.

RN: … you have this wonderful undoing of Hillary Clinton in just a few lines, when you write about her laughing about Gaddafi being torn limb from limb. What was it she said: we came, we saw, he died.

LE: It’s totally unforgivable. And the whole way they behave. All this nonsense about her being the first woman president. But she didn’t have the policies that would have helped women, so what the hell difference does it make? I thought people were completely nuts about her and they tried to make everyone feel guilty who didn’t back her. She shouldn’t have got the nomination. She didn’t have the support. If we had got Bernie, there could have been enough support to stop this Trump presidency, and the Democratic Party prevented that from happening. But the whole system is so stupid with the two party thing and an independent doesn’t have a chance, and the electoral college (system) is just ridiculous. It should be one person – one vote, and everyone should vote. That should be a law. It shouldn’t be voluntary. That’s the one thing you’ve got to do. I don’t know if it would help them, because they are also so reactionary, you might just get even more Trumps if everyone voted. But they often say: the Blacks aren’t voting, the women aren’t voting, the young aren’t voting, and those are all much more likely to vote for liberalism. Americans like saying liberalism, but liberalism failed us. I don’t like the word progressive either. Who wants progress? That sounds capitalistic, doesn’t it? I’d like a little stasis… of a good kind. Go back to nature and just shut up. Everybody sit down and shut up. That would be nice. I mean you can chat amongst yourselves, but stop building crap, stop wrecking everything, stop making war on innocents.

RN: What you were just saying reminded me of something you wrote in **Dot in the Universe** (2003): ‘Seek wasteland. Seek wilderness. Cling to anything they haven’t examined yet.’

LE: It’s true. It’s been a long-lasting interest of mine: the undisturbed. I’ve been searching for it, though not very effectively, all my life. Because people who really know what they’re doing, go off into the wilderness and explore it. And I’ve just explored wherever I’ve happened to be. Never the wilderness. I’ve hardly ever been to a National Park. But I think that’s sort of artificial anyway. What we see is what we got to work with. I’ve led mainly an urban life, not completely, but pretty urban. Or when I lived in the country it was within a mile or two of a town, so I don’t know anything about nature, I just think it’s a good idea. (laughs)

RN: Coming back to **Ducks**: in your other novels you work with clashes between very different characters…

LE: You’ve got to differentiate your characters, you’ve got to have contrast.

RN: ...yes, and you often start very far away and you bring them as close as you can, that seems to be often what is going on. 

LE: Interesting.

RN: In **Ducks** we are very close to the central woman’s experiences. And she has this expansive understanding of the world, also historical, and trying to accept where she’s living. But she has this difficult relationship with her sexuality and the animal, natural world. To me that felt like they were very much her blind spots. She reaches the limits of her understanding with a Trump-supporting, gun-carrying man who delivers her chicken feed, and with her own daughter. And then you also have this lioness who faces the limits to her understanding of humans and natural phenomena. You write these wonderful passages which explore the inability to understand. I was wondering if you could say more about that. This gap.

LE: I like the way you described it. I don’t know if I successfully did this, but I was trying to bridge gaps, mainly. I think the biggest gap is to get inside this woman’s head and that’s a big leap. But I think you are right, there are the gaps that remain, that can’t be bridged. There are difficulties, there are unexplained things going on within the family – there always are. Families are impossible things to handle. And nobody knows each other well enough, or wants to maybe. It’s based on resistance, just in order to have some space to yourself. But you’re stuck together in this endless way. It’s probably never supposed to be like that. With the lion, the children grow up and they buzz off, they don’t hang around. The extended family is a good idea for humans. This nuclear family is very troublesome. But anyway… the gaps. Well, I think it’s troubling that we can’t understand each other. There’s very little real communion to be had in life. Nobody knows where you go in your dreams every night. Nobody really knows what you’re thinking most of the day. And you try to have these connections with people. Yeah: Only connect! (E.M. Forster), but it’s not that easy. You’re right, she doesn’t have much connection with nature, really. Very little. She notices the trees once in a while. She’s too busy. She’s busy with her machines, and money, trying to make a living… and the kids, who really should leave home pretty soon. You don’t really need a 15-year old girl around at all. It’s time for them to leave. This friend of ours thinks that people should all go to camp at puberty, and get it all out of their system there, and come home when they can be decent companions again. I think that would be nice, and meanwhile, at camp they can do anything they want, which is what they wanna do. And they can't study at that age, so why make them? Instead we make them do their most important exams, as teenagers… and they should just be having sex, and drinking and taking drugs, like for 10 years or so. Maybe not that long. The trouble is, you’d never get the parents to agree, because they wouldn’t want their little babies going off alone into the world… but people used to. In Victorian times, you’d send off your son to the Navy, or whatever, at 10, 12? Well, parenthood is very difficult. We haven’t figured out how to make it work. God, you feel so guilty about everything. And I conveyed this to my own daughter, my own guilt, just that the world wasn’t perfect. I think we’ve got the wrong end of the stick, somehow. But I do feel guilty, to bring someone into this world and you can’t control enough about it, and the whole thing is dissolving now. What’s awful is that I think everyone’s finally noticed, and just in the last year I feel like everybody’s facing it now. That we’ve completely wrecked nature. The planet will survive, but civilization probably won’t, human civilization, and most of the animals, that were doing fine for millions of years. So, talk about conscience, we really need a little rethink on how we behave.

RN: With some experiences there’s this expectation that you’ll get over it, or you’ll get better, and some things you don’t recover from. My father died almost two years ago, and since your first books you wrote a lot about losing parents and how that is something that you don’t really recover from. I thought that is a very important thing to write about, because most people try and cover it up… often with a facile form of words. But to have this open wound, especially in **Ducks, Newburyport**, where the main character keeps coming back to that…

LE: I wasn’t really trying to persuade anyone or campaign for this to be noticed. I was trying to be honest about it. A lot of the time I think, how do people cope with all this death? They must have to forget about it, or how would they survive? But I don’t know if people do forget about it, at all. Other people forget about it, that’s understandable. And then you tell yourself: well, they’ve forgotten about it, maybe I ought to forget about it. And that’s stupid, because there’s nothing you can do about it. Things do churn around, your attitude can change over time, to the dead. People start by hero-worshipping, a lot of people do that, about the spouse, and this weird stuff comes out: when the guy was alive, you didn’t seem to like him at all, but all of a sudden, once he’s dead, he’s just a perfect guy. And then that can change too, and maybe you get more real about it. But obviously this is a scar that doesn’t go away. It can adapt. Until you’re dead, you’re not gonna get away from it. I was thinking the other day how much a single death is hard to bear, and then the fact that people are still using bombs… it’s the most primitive and ignorant way to behave, to kill anybody. You have no idea what harm you’re causing, to how many people, and who has the right? So, I think people should stop having babies, but also stop killing each other.

RN: Yes: there’s no ifs, no maybes I’ll never have babies (title of a short story recently published by Lucy Ellmann). I read that yesterday. I found it heart-breaking, that story, it’s so awful. [both laugh] But you were talking about bridging gaps and that made me think about all the cinematic references you have in **Ducks, Newburyport** and all the films that the main character keeps coming back to, and how they are a link to her parents and how that shared set of references breaks with her own daughter, Stacey. Stacey is not going to watch a black and white film, but also the world has changed so substantially that these films do not mean anything to her. And then there is that devastating passage when she tells her mother, yes I watch the musicals and they show me how I am not white (her father is a Native American). But with the films, you pick such incredible moments from them. James Mason saying ‘Rrrapid City, South Dakota’ (in **North by Northwest** (1959)), it’s part of my consciousness, I can’t get rid of that whatever I do. Or: ‘She’s just about to close up the library!’ (from **It’s a Wonderful Life** (1946)) – that line is so loaded with meaning from that film, that when you use it in the book, it’s like someone’s thrown a tonne of bricks onto you.

LE: That’s true, yes. But I hadn’t noticed that break for Stacey, that’s very good. I think my bridging the gap idea was… I think many gaps should be bridged, probably not all. And most won’t be, probably, if one’s realistic.

RN: Well, the road to hell is paved with good intentions. (both laugh) You were saying about the present moment and how people have noticed much more how bad things are. And you’ve been writing for over 30 years about masculinity, capitalism, our control of nature and it seems like finally now, everyone’s catching up. Do you feel that?

LE: I’m kind of impressed with where feminism is at the moment. Maybe I am too complacent about it and I lead a sheltered life where I try to only talk to people who are feminists, so I may not have my finger on the pulse, but it does feel like a lot of men as well as women are fully convinced of the need for this now. I like that. I was thinking about Greta Thunberg the other day, because I thought that she rightly says: how dare you? I love that. And rightly berates everybody for letting this continue the way it has. But what I remember is, in the 60s we were all protesting about everything, and I thought that was how life was going to be. And suddenly in the 70s, it deteriorated into more violent movements I guess and a lot more reactionary stuff and it just seemed to die. And I thought we were going to get somewhere with all that. And now people are saying: guess what, you know what you do when you’re trying to change the world, you march and you protest and you gather. Well, we knew all that, but what happened? Why didn’t people continue doing it? And now I don’t know why everyone isn’t simple gathering at all times. I don’t know why anyone is sitting around watching TV anymore. We should all be organising, 24 hours a day, to stop these corporations and governments in their tracks. And the French train strike is very effective. Just do it and you keep doing it, you don’t go home. That’s serious protesting, but I don’t know where that happens. Greta has managed to harness a lot of excitement and that’s great, but I am a little worried about it because we did all of that before. And it didn’t do anything. And then we lost our way. And no doubt, every movement loses its way. Where will we be in 5 or 10 years with the climate? For one thing, we’ll over-reach the deadline, so at that point is everyone just going to disperse and start flying around after all, and driving their cars, using plastic because what the hell, we might as well live for today, or what? I do think that it’s hopeless not to try, that’s really hopeless. But it may be hopeless anyway. Until we know it’s definitely hopeless though, it’s like Pascal (both laugh)… consider doing something.

RN: I was wondering about this other thing… do you see yourself as an entertainer? And do you think that this has led to your work not being taken seriously?

LE: I think it’s a crime to bore people, yes. And it’s also a crime to show off. It’s not a crime, it’s an indulgence. And I also think that humour is not an extra, it’s absolutely essential to any kind of honest and fully human approach. Well, animals have humour too. Maybe more than we will ever know...

(a little dog starts barking in the pub)

RN: Perfect timing! (both laugh)

LE: … so if you’re not being funny, I just think you’re repressing something unnaturally. And people who have no sense of humour are very peculiar people. They can’t really function. So, I don’t find it surprising that books are funny, but I don’t think that art is therapy and it’s not entertainment. It is there to help you confront something. It’s got to be challenging. I think I’ve challenged people as much as I think I can get away with, and to some extent I encourage them and compensate them by joking around. And I get some stuff said that people wouldn’t swallow, I guess, if I couldn’t make it entertaining. So it’s part of the job. It’s an interesting question, I don’t think I really have the answer. I never thought of it that way, though I hope people enjoy reading it, I would hate it if it was a drag. (laughs) I also need to make a living and I don’t think you could sell something that was just totally unwelcome to anyone, so somehow it has to be fun, because it’s not anyone else’s job to read. It is my job to write, but nobody else has to read anything, and fewer people do read anything. So I think in some ways I like shocking them by finding out that there will be some fun involved even though the subject matter is disturbing or troubling. Usually not too disturbing, but you find some of it quite disturbing?

RN: A lot of it!

LE: I think that’s good. And with some of it the effect might be entertaining, but some of it is helpless self-expression and a willingness to burden other people with everything that depresses me, so it’s not wholly kind-hearted necessarily.

RN: Thanks for that! (both laugh) I don’t think I want a wholly kind-hearted book. This brings us neatly to this question around humour. The way you use humour is wonderful and very specific, you use satire, gargantuan imagery, you use these dad jokes, jokes about jokes and sometimes you work through overloading the reader, or you have these simple child-like alliterations and rhyme – again they can be very elegant or ridiculous. And then you shift to something more subtle or very serious or very raw and you pull the reader out of the humorous, so I was just wondering how you work on this and how do you know when it’s enough? Do you overdo it and decide: I’m going to row back. Or is it a question of it’s never enough?

LE: It’s never enough discombobulation of the reader. Yeah, I like doing that. There’s a lot of editing that goes into deciding how lively a passage is, how you knock it into shape or relieve it of some of its less pleasing aspects. I like paradoxes, I guess. I like to be disconcerting and sometimes I think I probably disconcert people too much, so I might try to pull back. You don’t want them in a state of incomprehension or resistance, you want them at your mercy. You don’t want them thinking: she’s doing this to me too much, I’m not going to let her do it to me anymore. (laughs) But you can only guess, it’s all guesswork, and you follow your instinct and hope for the best. I really had no idea that anyone would like this book at all! I didn’t know what it was when I finished it. I had no idea. It’s still scary to me in a way that people do like it and then I wonder why do they like it so much? I think it’s out of my control now. It was always out of my control. (both laugh) You’re working on a tiny little section, like a tapestry maker, or something, of this enormous thing, and you can only work on a little bit at a time, hoping that all the other workers are doing their bit, so that your little section won’t look out of place in the end. This novel took a lot of editing. Many major edits, with the help of my publishers and a good schedule, which really helped me, because usually when I send it in, if they accept it, they say OK, or they send proofs, that might be the next stage, and at that stage I completely go nuts and change everything and drive them crazy, and cost them money, and myself. This time, there were two completely distinct editing periods and drafts, and this was after I’d already spent seven years on it and done several drafts on my own, but this was with them reading it again and giving some more notes on it. And that was such a help. I felt much more prepared for publication than I ever had before, though still it’s a gargantuan book, and I’m still scared I missed stuff. I did feel that it was more done than any of my previous books, it’s more finished, but it’s so huge, it’s hard to know. Hard to check.

RN: It doesn’t feel like you’ve missed anything out. (both laugh) It feels like it’s a history of the world, you go out into the cosmos and you go into the details of domestic life. Maybe this is a good point to touch on these little moments of ecstasy which the main character has, and I really enjoyed. There are three that I picked out. I’ll read them out to you:  

_‘the fact that madeleines are like little memory sticks, but when you bite into one you get closure’  
‘the fact that there’s nighttime in clothing too, like pockets of darkness up a sleeve, or in your pants, or under your jacket’  
‘the fact that water must have a sense of itself, a real liking for itself, because bodies of water are always trying to meet up, the fact that it’s hard to keep them apart, the fact that that’s why oceans exist, they’re big water get-togethers’_  

LE: I like you calling them moments of ecstasy, that’s great.

RN: They feel like authentic thoughts, it’s not like something that comes out of a book or the internet or being constrained by your relationship with other people and the world, suddenly it’s as if you see the world for the first time.

LE: It’s not engineered. That was one of the freedoms of this form, that I could throw in just about anything I felt like saying. And I didn’t have to organise it, construct things in some artificial way, yes, it’s more organic. But when you said ecstasy, I thought of this other moment when she says: there are moments when you’re just happy, and you can’t get over the fact that you are alive and it all seems good. Briefly. There aren’t that many moments of that.

RN: Do you wonder what our thinking would be like if it wasn’t dominated by male, racist capitalism? Sometimes you have glimpses of this in your books. **Mimi** is beautiful because it shows change – it’s rare to see someone become an activist, those are always my favourite. It’s easy to show someone being active, being conscious, but how do they change?

LE: I just made him change, because I wanted him to.

RN: That was also generous, because you could have pushed him off a cliff.

LE: I’ve done that.

RN: I know. (both laugh) But do you ever have these thought-experiments where you wonder what our thinking would be if we lived in matriarchy, if we lived in another order, how would we be?

LE: I think you need a very good imagination for that. I think I only get glimpses, and there are glimpses in this book, of that. Like when she imagines she could have been an Earth Mother type. There could be a world in which women are much more welcome and everything they do is respected. I don’t mean to be mean to men exactly – men can come along on this, but it will involve a lot of change in their attitudes, but women’s attitudes too, because we can’t get over thinking ill of ourselves. So it would take a long time, but I think it would be interesting to see how much happier people could be. I think they could be happier. Except that we have already wrecked nature, so I’m not sure that we’ll ever be happy again. But maybe in prehistory, people were a lot happier than they are now, because there was respect, in my opinion, and there was peace. And I do not believe what Naomi Alderman seems to think. She wrote that novel called **The Power** (2017), in which women suddenly get this supernatural skill and they all just use it to kill people, they all just become violent imitators of men. That seems a really narrow prophecy of what women could be if they had freedom and were nurtured the way they could be. And everybody could be. I don’t know why we gave that up, at some point, and I do resent it. Women must have… well I know what happened, metal was discovered, and that was the end. So, if we’d just left the metal in the ground, we’d be ok, and this would never have happened. And once you’ve got the weapons, then obviously men have superior strength, upper arm strength maybe, and so they’re going to be good with the spears, and women were crushed. So, I shouldn’t resent women for it, because I don’t think there was just a moment when they said: oh, let them have power, who cares. They probably could not stop it. They would have wanted to stop it. And then it all became about killing, and we’re still doing it. And Naomi Alderman and Margaret Thatcher don’t seem to be able to think beyond that as a way of life. And most people don’t. And it’s ridiculous. It’s only… patriarchy has only lasted maybe 8000 years, not much more than that. Humans have been around for maybe 2 million, mountain lions have been around for a lot longer! They never had patriarchy. They’re doing fine. Or they would be… It’s so weird, our gender stuff. Animals just get on with living. They don’t sit around worrying about gender all day long!
  
RN: To change register a bit, one thing I am interested in is the shape of your books on the page: you use italics and you use capitals and quotes and hand-drawings… But **Ducks** feels more like a pre-Gutenberg manuscript, just this continuous texture. I was wondering if you could say something about this? Just to add, there is this literary snobbery which says that if you use too many italics and capitals, you are not taken seriously as a writer.

LE: Oh definitely. People are so touchy. (both laugh)

RN: You seem to enjoy pushing that button.

LE: Well actually, for one, I don’t see why you wouldn’t use everything at your disposal. If capital letters have some sort of effect, why wouldn’t one want to use that? I think it became a bit of a habit which I tried to control, but I couldn’t quite control it. And I remember I think on **Mimi**, or on one of them, before the proof stage I’d taken out too many capitals and they had to go back in, and that was very annoying to my publisher.

RN: But it was still less than the previous two!

LE: Well I bet it’s **Man or Mango** (1998) that had the most, I don’t know, or **Dot**? They seemed to work to me. I didn’t know it was so irritating to people. And you’re not even allowed to use them in emails or on Twitter. People are really overly sensitive about this. (both laugh) I did restrain it in **Ducks** though, for the sake of the character. I didn’t think she would be elaborate in the way she expressed herself just to herself, so I think I only allowed her italics, and quite a lot of italics, I admit. But not many capital letters. And it was interesting trying to break that habit, but I haven’t broken it. I think capital letters are very good, I like them. They’re funny and they’re powerful, they mean something. And I think everything should have illustrations. There should be more really. I hated graduating into adult books with no pictures. Also, British children’s books never seemed to me to have enough pictures, so I was very critical of that as a child, I wouldn’t read those. I’m quite a reluctant reader in many ways, so I like lures. I didn’t like the idea that my capital letters were putting people off, but I also didn’t like being mocked for the capital letters, as if it was some sort of disability. Once on the radio, on the BBC, this guy wanted me to read it, because he wanted to hear how I read out the capital letters, and I felt it was mockery. Luckily they never aired that reading. I did it, but I didn’t like it. To be treated like that. A freak show. Just read it. If it makes no sense to you, tough luck. Read on. Pretend they aren’t capitalised, if you can’t understand why they are capitalised. But why would you not understand their purpose? And a lot of the time the rhythm of the sentence is ruined if people don’t read it right and I got very controlling about that. A bit obsessive. But you can’t tell everybody all the time how to read everything – that’s a bit intrusive, I guess.

RN: They’re great fun to read, they sound wonderful when they’re read. I read passages to people and they go wild, because they don’t know where it’s coming from. (both laugh)

LE: If it was music, you’d have all the dynamics: crescendo, and so on, that’s how it is. If it was drama, there would be indications of how it might be said, the line, and also what’s happening while you’re saying it. But lots of composers are quite obsessive in that way, this one note has a point over it to show that that one has to be very separate from the others. They’re just as nutty as I am.

RN: Yeah, the one I like is ‘rallentando’ - a slowing down…

LE: With Strauss waltzes there is always that elongation of some bit, probably happens in tango all the time, where the third note is a bit later than you expect, or it doesn’t sound right. And it’s not written, it’s understood, or there must be some way of saying do it to here, on the score.

RN: Do you see yourself as part of a literary tradition and if so, why does it matter?

LE: I had no idea until my publisher said I am a modernist. And I suddenly began to think of myself as a modernist, quite happily, but I didn’t really know that. I just like the innovative novel and I like it from Sterne onwards: Dickens, Molly Keane, Joyce and Beckett and Bernhard. Those seem really important, but there are others along the way… Americans… I don’t think Roth is a perfect novelist, but **Portnoy’s Complaint** (1969) was important. At least the first half. And then, there’s **Lolita** (1955) – I guess Nabokov is a modernist, I don’t know, I don’t go for classifications. I don’t go for academic approaches and I think the theorists have tried to kill literature and I want nothing to do with that. So I don’t know what they say about anything. I’m telling you, I lead a very sheltered life. Mainly I like originality, so I don’t like cults and clubs and movements. Modernism, as most movements go, is one of the better ones. But I didn’t know it was still going on. These things don’t all arrive like trains... 

RN: Not like trains in this country! (both laugh)

LE: Dutch trains… they’re not like Dutch trains, arriving on time and in order. But Flaubert was a crazy guy. Stendhal was a crazy guy. And Rabelais.

RN: That’s as far as literary predecessors go. But I am also struck that you have used your own parents’ work in your own work. We are limited in knowing what can and will be useful to our descendants, because they will live in a different historical moment and they are different to us, and they will find inspiration where we sometimes saw dead-ends. Can you say more about this question of what we try to pass on to those coming and what we try to take from those who came before us?

LE: I don’t know what to add. Yeah, you don’t know. Well, my parents died in their 60s and I felt that I didn’t get the full dose of them and there wasn’t enough handed down. What amazes me, and it’s not just motherhood, it’s parenthood – it’s amazing how this keeps going on. Are we innately moral, or we learn all these morals along the way… whether we stick by them or not. Are the parents doing all this? Or do you learn it at school? Do you learn it when you get arrested for not doing it right? But most of the time people seem to be inheriting this tradition and it goes way back, I don’t see a break. That’s why it’s so mind-boggling what Trump is like, because he openly ignores all this stuff, which people more or less agree is good. There’s something called compassion and he wants to defy that, I guess a lot of people do, or there have always been more people who have defied it than others, because there have always been so many criminals. As soon as you invent the computer, there are people rushing to sabotage it, and give everybody viruses. It occurred to me today though that if we’re all going to be taken over by robots, our saviours might be the hackers who give the robots the viruses, if the robots get out of control, I mean… But how will they ever get out of control, when you can’t even keep one computer working for more than 5 years? I think we’re safe from robots. Just don’t charge them up if they’re making trouble. 

